---
title: "REU 2026"
permalink: /reu2026/
author_profile: true
 - "/reu2026.html"
---

The LOOM Lab is excited to announce the 2026 Research Experience for Undergraduate Students opportunity is open to applications! Join us for a full-time, 10-week internship or a part-time 16-week internship and get **paid $10,000** to get hands-on experience conducting **human-computer interaction research** that explores the intersection between **digital equity** and **community networks.**

We are actively recruiting  **undergraduate** students enrolled in a 2-year or 4-year US institution to start a research internship in Summer 2026. 

# Projects

All projects are related to the overarching research question: _What motivates participation in community network management? What challenges participation?_ 

In 2025, the [International Telecommunications Union](https://www.itu.int/itu-d/reports/statistics/2025/10/15/ff25-internet-use/) estimated that 6 billion people used the Internet--about 74% of the global population. However, digital inequities persist, particularly in [lower income](https://www.itu.int/itu-d/reports/statistics/2025/10/15/ff25-affordability-of-ict-services/) and [rural](https://www.itu.int/itu-d/reports/statistics/2025/10/15/ff25-internet-use-in-urban-and-rural-areas/) communities. 

For communities that are perniciously underserved by commercial telecommunications infrastructure, community networks and network advocacy are critical pathways to digital equity. In this project, we seek to explore the incentives and barriers that impact participation in community networks and network advocacy with the goal of identifying new pathways for creating more inclusive and effective Internet connectivity for communities.
 
There are three different project options that you can focus on:

## Ethnographic Study of Network Operators

**Research Question:** _What are the motivations and barriers that network operators experience as they deploy and manage community-based network infrastructure?_

**Research Skills Gained:** By the end of this research experience, you will be able to:

+ _Conduct research interviews with users_
+ _Analyze interview data using tools like Miro and methods like reflexive thematic analysis_
+ _Write qualitative research findings for an ACM SIGCHI publication venue_
+ _Complete standard Human Research Subjects training for ethical research conduct_
+ _Present findings as a poster or oral presentation_

## Quantitative Analysis of Network Usage Data

**Research Question:** _How do large scale community networks evolve over time? To what extent are they dependent on a small set of super operators vs. a growing contingent of new operators?_

**Research Skills Gained:** By the end of this research experience, you will be able to:
<span style="color:red">This opportunity is best suited for a student who has some prior experience programming in Python.</span>

+ _Pull large data sets from Amazon S3 using 
+ _Use a [high performance computing cluster](https://icer.msu.edu/) to analyze large data sets with Python [scipy](https://scipy.org/), [scikit-learn](https://scikit-learn.org/stable/), and [networkx](https://networkx.org/en/)_
+ _Generate high quality data visualizations that communicate patterns in complex data sets_
+ _Write quantitative research findings for an ACM SIGCHI publication, ICWSM, or WWW_
+ _Present findings as a poster or oral presentation_


## Exploring Network Measurement via Co-Design
<span style="color:red">This opportunity is best suited for a student who is able to do 16-week part time internship.</span>

**Research Question:** _How do we measure_ meaningful _connectivity from a community perspective?_

**Research Skills Gained:** By the end of this research experience, you will be able to:

+ _Prepare co-design sessions with probes
+ _Collect multimedia data using audio and video recording as well as field memos_
+ _Analyze multimedia data using reflexive thematic analysis and video analysis software like [BORIS](https://www.boris.unito.it/)_ 
+ _Write qualitative design research findings for an ACM SIGCHI publication, ACM COMPASS, or ICTD_
+ _Present findings as a poster or oral presentation_



# How to Apply

Send the following materials to Dr. Morgan Vigil-Hayes at [vigilhay@msu.edu](mailto:vigilhay@msu.edu) as a single PDF by May 15, 2026 for priority consideration:

## 1. Cover Letter
Write a 1-2 page cover letter explaining:

+ Which project you would like to work on and why you are a good fit for the project and the collaboration with the lab. 
+ Details about your professional, classroom, and life experiences that inform your interest and demonstrate your potential for research. 
+ Your long term professional goals and why this opportunity will help you in pursuit of those goals.
+ Whether you envision doing research for 10-weeks full-time or 16-weeks part-time and when you would like to start (earliest start date is 6/22/2026). 

## 2. Resume/CV
Provide a resume or curriculum vitae with your professional and education experience as well as relevant prior experience related to projects or research. Note that prior research experience is not a requirement, but it's helpful to know if you have conducted some research before!


## 3. Transcripts
Provide a set of recent unofficial transcripts. These are just for me to get a sense for what your training may have consisted of so far--there is no GPA requirement.

## 4. Contact Information for 2-3 References
Provide a list of 2-3 professional/educational references that can speak to your potential to conduct research. Include their name, how they are affiliated with you, their phone number, and email address.

# FAQs

## _What are the dates for the internship?_
The internship has flexible dates. The earliest that the REU experience can start is 6/22/2026 and the latest it can start is 1/15/2027. Please indicate in your cover letter when you would like to start.

## _Can I participate remotely?_
I strongly prefer for students doing a 10-week, full-time experience to participate on-site at Michigan State (in East Lansing, MI). For those interested in a 16-week option, I am open to having students participate in a hybrid experience that involves some time on-site in Michigan and some time remote. This would be something we could discuss if you are one of the final candidates for the position.

## _How does the stipend work?_
Stipends will be dispersed in increments every 2 weeks during your research internship.

## _Who is eligible to apply?_
Students who will be enrolled as undergraduate students in Fall 2026 at a US-based 2-year or 4-year institution of higher education are eligible to apply. This includes students at community colleges and tribal colleges. 

## _Who should apply?_
Students who have demonstrated a track record of excelling at independent project-based learning and independent learning and inquiry who are also interested in graduate school and research careers related to human-computer interaction. 

## _Do I need to have prior research experience?_
Not at all. The goal of REU's is to provide an opportunity for students with a high potential for being researchers to get hands on experience with the process in connection with a faculty mentor. However, you should be comfortable learning new skills and ideas on the job and being motivated to learn independently. 

## _What is human-computer interaction?_
HCI research studies how humans interact with computer systems. It blends methods from computer science, psychology, and social science. When we conduct research, we are conducting what is called _primary_ research where we generate original data and analysis about human-computer interactions. This is distinct from _secondary_ research where you might conduct a literature review on previously published studies.



